Elastic Beams
Eliyahu Gluschove-Koppel
Lab Group 23
Gonville & Caius
February 18, 2025
1 Summary
The local curvature of a simply supported beam was measured at intervals
along its length. The measured curvature can be used to calculate the bend-
ing stiﬀness of the beam and, through numerical integration, the deﬂection
at each point along the beam. Comparing this to the measured deﬂection
at one point along the beam shows that the calculated value is within the
margin of error for the instruments used.
2 Introduction
When a simply supported is loaded at a point, the beam elastically deforms
and thus deﬂects. The deﬂection at each point can be calculated by numeri-
cally integrating the local curvature measured at each point. The deﬂection
can also be simply measured by using deﬂection gauges at each point, but
this requires more time and eﬀort to set up and calibrate. Instead, the cur-
vature method can be used, and the deﬂection measured directly at a single
point to conﬁrm the accuracy of the numerical integration method. The
curvature and moment applied at each point can also be used to calculate
the bending moment of the beam, and this compared to the theoretical value
calculated from the geometry and loading.
3 Method
An aluminium beam was set up with simple supports at one end and at
15 cm from the other end, as shown in Figure 1. The initial curvature was
measured at points spaced 5 cm apart along the length of the beam. A
displacement gauge was zeroed at the point 30 cm from one end, at the
midpoint of the central section. A loading of 50 N was then applied to the
1midpoint of the central section of the beam to cause elastic deformation of
the beam. The curvature and displacement were then measured at the same
points and the diﬀerence from initial readings calculated.
Figure 1: Measurement points and loading of the beam
More detailed information can be found in the lab handout.
4 Results, Observations and Calculations
After collecting the initial and ﬁnal curvature measurements, the diﬀerence
between them can be calculated. This avoids any eﬀects due to the beam
bending from self-weight or the beam not being manufactured straight. The
curvature due to loading ( κ) was then plotted as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Measurement points and loading of the beam
Based on the loading, the bending moment can be calculated along the
beam. The beam can be separated into three sections, starting from the
left edge, splitting at each point load. This results in the following bending
moments, measuring x from the left end:
↷
M =



−25x 0 ≤ x< 25
50 (x− 25) − 25x 25 ≤ x< 50
50 (x− 25) − 25x− 25 (x− 50) 50 ≤ x≤ 65
2Plotting this results in the same shape as the plot of κ against distance.
Plotting the ratio of M to κ shows a linear relationship (Figure 3). The
constant of proportionality is the bending stiﬀness ( B) of the beam, which
can be estimated from the gradient.
Figure 3: Calculated bending moment against measured κ
B was estimated to be 250 000 Ncm2.
To remove any experimental error in further calculations, new linear values
of κ were calculated using the calculated values of M and the value of B
averaged across the entire beam.
The angle ( ψ) that the beam is instantaneously curving at each point is
related to the curvature by ψ =
∫
κdx+ c, where x is the distance along
the beam. This can be calculated through numerical integration, taking
∆ψ = κ∆x = 5κ], and summing consecutive terms from a known starting
value of ψ. To get a more accurate value, the value of κused is the mean of
the two values either side of the segment being integrated. Additionally, the
value of ψ is known to be 0 at midspan, so other values can be calculated
by working outwards from the centre, using ψn+1 = ψn + 5κmean. This is
shown in Figure 4.
The deﬂection at each point can subsequently be calculated, as at each
point dy
dx = sin (ψ). Taking a small angle approximation, and using the
databook sign convention, this results in dy
dx = −ψ. y = 0 at each support,
so a similar approach can be applied again to calculate y following the
relationship yn+1 = yn + 5ψmean. This is shown in Figure 5, along with
the deﬂection measured directly at station 6.
3Figure 4: Calculated values of ψ
 Figure 5: Calculated values of y
5 Discussion
There is likely some error in the measured deﬂection value. The deﬂection
gauge can be arbitrarily rotated around the horizontal axis, and so was
probably not measuring direct vertical displacement but instead displace-
ment along a slight angle. Since this was adjusted by eye, the error in angle
is likely around ±5 deg, resulting in an error in the displacement of around
±0.38 %. Additionally, there is an error of ±0.001 cm in the measured value,
giving a percentage error of 0 .19 %.
Comparing the measured deﬂection value ( −0.518 cm) to the calculated
value (−0.516 cm) shows the error as 0.39 %. Taking into account the sources
of error in the deﬂection measurement, the two values are within margin of
error. This should be conﬁrmed by comparing the values at at least two
more places, but this indicates that calculating the deﬂection from the lo-
cal curvature is an accurate method to determine the deﬂection along a
beam.
6 Conclusions
• The bending stiﬀness of a beam can be calculated from the local cur-
vature and bending moment
• The bending angle can be calculated through numerical integration of
the local curvature
• Numerically integrating the bending angle results in a good approxi-
mation of the deﬂection of the beam
4